---
layout:     post
title:      "Identity, Self-Formation, and Digitized Agency on the Personalized, Writeable Internet"
date:       2018-01-20
summary:    Hooked into dozens of digital systems, the 21st person is becoming increasingly fragmented, perverted, exploited, and de-humanized.
categories: social-media internet-culture futurism
---

From your Facebook profile we can derive your sexuality, age, and political views [^1]. This means that in a very real sense certain salient aspects of yourself, and thus part of your identity, are replicated across Facebook datacenters. This is form a self-distribution, happening in this case without particular acknowledge or perhaps consent, and it is the general idea of the fragmented, distributed digital identity, this *projection* of ourselves into internet software systems, that is to be explored below. Obviously Facebook isn't the only one in on the game. Tinder knows* your romantic preferences, Pornhub your fetishes, Uber Eats your dietary needs, and The New York Times your worldly concerns. All this is rather uncontroversially being used to build your 'Daily Me'[^2]; various fragments of your identity (ie. of your *self*) extracted, stored, and instrumented into delivering you 'value', into enabling your preferences. To emphasise what's happening to the identity, over some abstract notion of 'personal data’, I think allows for better inspection of the perversity of this current practice. Currently, the self is 'managed' online by software systems, those system’s management theory is broken. Broken as it is, it has so far proved to be such an effective driver of ad-revenue that without realising it the theory will be mastered and it's apotheosis will be a hugely confused, inefficient subversion of human value. Fortunately there's always another way, and despite current problems, continued work into intelligent systems of online self-formation and self-management, like such done by [Time Well Spent](http://www.timewellspent.io/), could see truly amazing improvements in our connected systems ability to positively augment ourselves and our lives.

^ rewrite that shit

> * they don't really know, but more on that below

It is important to set out what *exactly* is meant by a ‘distributed self’ before proceeding as if it’s a natural and not perverse way to understand people. First is to realise that the mind is, in a very important sense, not contained neatly within your head. In their seminal paper, *The Extended Mind*, D Chalmers and A Clark invite the reader to consider the case of poor forgetful Otto and his notebook, proposing that Otto’s relationship with his notebook best sees his notebook understood as a mind artefact,  a memory device not fundamentally divided from our internal memory systems (and neither from our cloud storage). Do read the paper if you haven’t, and hopefully see that our minds are not always in brains, they are sometimes in books. In the paper, Otto puts directions, but he, and we, are not precluded from putting things in notebooks, or in computers and other artefacts, things that speak much more deeply to an idea of *who we are*. In the simple case, we may point to the distinction between an notebook and a diary, but it is more interesting to consider the mind breaching the brain barrier and housing itself within another person. Most readily this is seen in our relationships with loved ones, and with our children. From our current perspective, this bonding we do with those close to us is seen as a sharing and placement of ourselves *into* others, and having those cherished others give parts of themselves to us to keep for a time. Douglas Hofstader speaks vividly of this phenomena in *I Am A Strange Loop*, when detailing in a chapter the reality of losing his wife.

> A person is a point of view — not only a physical point of view (looking out of certain eyes in a certain physical place in the universe), but more importantly a psyche’s point of view: a set of hair-trigger associations rooted in a huge bank of memories. The latter can be absorbed, more and more over time, by someone else. Thus it’s like acquiring a foreign language step by step.

Once you shift into thinking of persons as a fluidity, non-atomic, multi-personal, and negotiated with our surroundings[^socio-material-ecology], you can start seeing self-sharding all over the place. It is with this understanding of identity and the self that we are able to see a person not outlined adequately by their body, but strewn across their environment, to be found in certain artefacts like books or drawings,  in other person, or in datacenters.

The main drivers of identity fragment extraction are of course companies, and they've been doing it since the days you filled out your preferred breakfast & newspaper order at a hotel. This is a perfectly reasonable thing do, and in the past it was a perfectly appropriate method of extraction (how else are they going to get that information into their filing cabinet?), but it's not enough of an insight to facilitate targeted propoganda on Twitter [^3]. Again, there is nothing fundamentally new about this kind of self-externalisation and self-distribution (in this case of preferences), but it is *how* it is being doing in the context of the modern, writeable internet that is has become the beginnings of a great mess.

Besides these manual, passé methods of information extraction from people, the explosion of the internet has brought feasibility to massively-scaled *passive* and convert methods of extraction. The passive bit is partly great, avoid the UX anti-pattern of tedious, repetitive user 'onboarding' and feedback elicitation mechanisms. It's partly bad, because passive information-sharing by users is a highly limited thing, but more on that later. The covert nature of the extraction however is not really at all great, and what arises from this self-extraction activity conducted by companies is so often adversarial to ourselves and also sometimes exploitative. It's adversarial, for example, when the information gathering process serves to learn what kind of content will keep you on site, whether you really want to be or not. It's adversarial, when the process seeks to discover your individual *Willingness To Pay*, which is the maximum price you'll pay, when you yourself want the *minimum price they'll sell for*. It's exploitative, when what the system knows about you can be sold to the highest paying propagandist, or the highest paying snake-oil salesman.

People wouldn't participate in this disadvantageous gifting of valuable personal insight if they could help it, and so it happens silently and almost totally without cooperation between user and system. Without this cooperation what results is millions of potentially unfriendly (and as yet very primitive) [Black Mirror-Type ‘Cookies’](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZyzfnZVCCk).* These are likely familiar concerns (‘’If you’re not paying, you’re the product” and all that), but attention should be paid in particular to the role passive preference and identity extraction systems play in creating these issues, because [though research exists](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sec.379/full) we need more, and because solutions to these issues provide the clearest avenue to a software ecosystem centred on user value.

^ last sentence is unsupported

> * I don’t think Black Mirror’s word choice there is coincidental. That episode was extrapolating today’s systems where tastes are learnt to recommend music, restaurants, books etc.   

Passive identity extraction techniques are limited, and often to such an extent that they ought to be abandoned as the dominant pattern of gaining user understanding  and delivering user value.  We spend as much as [half our waking hours](https://www.statista.com/statistics/416850/average-duration-of-internet-use-age-device/) engaged with the internet , and yet largely the systems within it only receive clues about our experiences during that time from taps of our finger and maybe clicks of a mouse. On the internet we are often faceless, bodiless, and wordless. When engaging in content that is maybe [highly meaningful to us](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8CrOL-ydFMI), all the get’s projected into our user profile is a few course metrics, and maybe just one. How long did they stay on site? How do our software systems gain any idea of the meaning and value we derived from an interaction while we’re interacting, let alone days after when hindsight offers clearer evaluation? They basically don’t. Hours a day per person are spent on the internet, we use it now as a tool towards so much and yet how exactly does it answer question like these?:

* What are my short, medium, and long term goals?
* Am I unhappy, stressed, or excited?
* What challenges do I face in my day to day?
* What do I want to learn about?

The questions are of course hugely difficult for computers to reason about, and they’re often difficult for people themselves to elucidate, but they are the kinds of questions that get down to the brass-tax of the human experience. To step back from these grander questions, we can at least see how more active, direct engagements between a computer system and a human can lead to immediately better outcomes.  Instead of a user’s newsfeed being curated on the basis of ‘maximum engagement’, which devolves quickly into outrage-porn and clickbait, just have the system ask the user what they need to know and what they want to learn about. This is not hard of course, it’s already done adequately in places, but for some reason if you want to give explicit feedback to systems you’ll have to give the same feedback *over and over again*. Really, you have to give the passive feedback over and over again to, it’s just that that’s less annoying.

This is the result of the siloing that exists currently, with dozens of companies building fragments of yourself and not sharing them with anyone, not even *you*. If some sale of personal data has not occurred between your regular entertainment media company A and your new company B for your personal data, company B is meeting you blind. Company C, D, E.. Z will meet you blind too, and isn’t that just a bit dumb? We used to come into hotels and fill in our breakfast preferences on paper and that was fine, but in the internet age having to repeatedly offer essentially the same data to multiple entities is a solved problem.

Though there a great danger to the sharing of the self, there an obvious great reward. From today’s shallow, corrupted projections of ourselves conceivably we could move to a rich, cultivate projection that allows any new system we encounter to immediately let us be understood and *served*, not manipulated.

Companies are starting to recognise that the personalisation, demand-structured internet and be brought into brick-and-mortar businesses. …..


[^1]: [*Private traits and attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior*](http://www.pnas.org/content/110/15/5802.full)

[^2]: [Daily Me - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daily_Me)

[^3]: [](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2017/10/09/russian-operatives-used-twitter-and-facebook-to-target-veterans-and-military-personnel-study-says/?utm_term=.88fa349a3676)
